Will a Leak Reveal Trump’s Tax Returns? Don’t Hold Your Breath

Donald Trump Tax Records Show He Could Have Avoided Taxes for Nearly Two Decades, The Times Found OCT. 1, 2016
So how might Mr. Trump’s returns come to light?

If you’re thinking about a rogue I.R.S. agent or Russian cybertheft, don’t count on it.

After one of Mr. Trump’s advisers said in January that he had no intention of ever releasing his returns, WikiLeaks accused him of breaching a campaign promise and called for leakers to send the filings its way for publication. Similar calls bubbled up last week when The New York Times reported that Mr. Trump hopes to gut the funding of the I.R.S., and critics on social media urged people inside the agency to take revenge by distributing his records.

It wouldn’t be easy. In 1973, an I.R.S. employee leaked private information from former President Richard M. Nixon’s taxes, resulting in a scandal that compelled him to declare, “I am not a crook.” Since then, the agency has taken rigid precautions to keep its data secure. Unauthorized disclosures come with steep penalties, including a prison sentence of up to five years and a $5,000 fine.

“I think an I.R.S. leak is extremely unlikely,” said Fred Goldberg, who served as I.R.S. commissioner from 1989 to 1992. “It’s a combination of the culture, the legal framework, the logistics and the risks.”

Although the I.R.S. has nearly 80,000 employees, the agency uses strict safeguards when it comes to privacy. The number of people with access to returns is limited, and improper browsing of taxpayer files is automatically flagged.

Hard copies of presidential returns historically have been kept in a safe outside of the commissioner’s office, tax experts say. Returns of celebrities are protected even more carefully than those of regular taxpayers.

“I would never say never, because it has happened in the past,” said Lawrence B. Gibbs, another former I.R.S. commissioner who was its chief counsel when Mr. Nixon’s tax information was made public. “But people are probably going to have to look elsewhere than the I.R.S. for the president’s tax returns if that’s what they want.”

A breach of the I.R.S. is another possibility, and the release this week of a trove of C.I.A. data shows that even the most tightly guarded corners of the government are vulnerable. Thin resources are also a problem, but since a 2015 hack of I.R.S. data using false identities, the agency has been working to bolster its defenses.

Jeffrey Greene, senior director for global government affairs and policy at the cybersecurity firm Symantec, said that the agency appears to have strengthened its computer systems since the theft two years ago, noting that Mr. Trump’s returns remained secure during the presidential campaign.

“Just the simple fact that those returns were never stolen or leaked over the past year speaks to the level of security on them,” said Mr. Greene, whose company works with the I.R.S.

Democratic lawmakers lately have been playing the national security card, clinging to the notion that congressional investigations into Mr. Trump’s ties with Russia will be the key. Twice this month they have forced votes to demand the returns’ release, but Republicans have closed ranks around the president.

“Fully investigating Trump associates’ ties to Russia must include allowing both Democrats and Republicans on the Finance Committee to privately review Mr. Trump’s returns,” Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the ranking Democrat on the committee, said earlier this week before his proposal was swiftly rejected by Republicans.

The next best hope is the coming wave of “emoluments” lawsuits that allege Mr. Trump is in violation of the Constitution because his business operations accept payments from foreign governments. A lawsuit that was filed in January by the liberal watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington seeks to stop Mr. Trump’s businesses from accepting such payments. If the case moves forward, Mr. Trump’s tax returns could be extracted in the discovery process.

“I think that certainly in our emoluments case they will be germane to establish the foreign cash and relationships and other benefits,” said Norman L. Eisen, an Obama administration ethics lawyer who is on the legal team that filed the lawsuit. “Should we make it to discovery, we’ll seek them.”

If the court system seems too cumbersome, there are potential targets beyond the I.R.S. Mr. Trump’s lawyers and accountants who keep copies of his returns could also be vulnerable to hacking. And the White House and Trump Tower, where copies of Mr. Trump’s files could potentially be stored, have also proved susceptible to leaks.

Thus far, the most significant window into Mr. Trump’s taxes came from a portion of his 1995 returns that was sent anonymously to the The New York Times last October. That showed that he could have used tax loopholes to avoid paying federal income taxes for up to 18 years.

The Trump administration’s rush to rewrite the tax code by August will probably amplify the cry for more information about Mr. Trump’s taxes. Whatever plan he decides to ultimately support will raise new questions about how he might benefit from an array of new incentives.

“There are a number of tax proposals that would benefit him on a personal level,” said David Herzig, a tax expert at Valparaiso University School of Law, who pointed to a potential estate tax repeal and lower individual tax rates for the rich. “There are many dimensions to tax reform, but the constant is that the proposed modifications help people that have similar investment profiles as President Trump.”
---
New York City to Get Less Federal Aid for Housing

Mayor Bill de Blasio speaking to construction workers on Wednesday before a news conference in Brooklyn. Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times
President Donald J. Trump has yet to put his mark on the federal budget, but in a possible harbinger of leaner times to come, officials in New York City are already contending with declines in federal funding to programs that assist some of the city’s poorest residents.

Two city agencies that provide subsidized housing were told in letters sent last month that they would receive less from the federal government. In all, the funding shortfalls at the two agencies, the New York City Housing Authority and the Housing Preservation and Development agency, could total more than $58 million by the end of the year.

Mayor Bill de Blasio has for weeks insisted that the city would not make pre-emptive adjustments to its budget to account for what could amount to major cuts to federal funding for city programs. New York City received about 10 percent of its budget, or about $8.8 billion, from the federal government in the 2017 fiscal year.

“We also are not going to say to folks in Washington, go ahead and cut us because we have so much money to put in — we don’t,” the mayor said Wednesday during an unrelated news conference about the city’s coming ferry service. “Our reserves could be eaten up very, very quickly if the magnitude of budget cuts that’s possible here was to play out.”

The decline in funding to the housing agencies does not affect only New York and was not initiated by the Trump administration. Nor does it represent a budget cut in the usual sense: a new federal budget has yet to be introduced in Congress. The federal government and all its programs are currently operating on the basis of a continuing resolution, which keeps the funding levels flat. That translates in some cases into a de facto decline because of rising costs.

But rather than a simple cut, the decline in funding received by New York City was the result of a new formula adopted by the Department of Housing and Urban Development in Washington in anticipation of what is likely to be a dramatic change in the federal budget from a Republican-controlled Congress and White House.

A spokesman for the federal Housing Department declined to comment on the changes, citing the fluid nature of the budget process in Washington that could adversely affect the federal agency.

The impact was not felt everywhere equally. In Los Angeles, for example, the changes to the funding were small enough that they did not affect the city’s public housing budget, according to officials there.

“The City of L.A. has not felt the same financial challenges that N.Y.C.H.A. has experienced,” said George Kivork, a spokesman for Mayor Eric M. Garcetti, a Democrat. He added that the city was nevertheless preparing for possible cuts. "Los Angeles will push forward with local policies to fill any potential funding gaps,” he said.

A man walked his dog through an empty lot in the Van Dyke Houses, a public housing development in Brooklyn. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times
In New York City, home to the nation’s largest public housing program, the new formula resulted in real losses.

The changes were described in the letters, laden with bureaucratic acronyms and funding formulas, that were sent to cities late last month. They translate to about $23 million less for New York City’s housing department for the federal Section 8 program, which subsidizes private apartment rentals, if the same funding level holds through the end of the year.

The city’s department of Housing Preservation and Development “is deeply concerned about the impact that future budget cuts would have on low-income New Yorkers,” said Elizabeth Rohlfing, a spokeswoman for the agency. “Our Section 8 program serves as an essential lifeline to struggling families across the City, and we will continue to advocate for the funding we need to sustain it.”

At the public housing authority, the decline in funding is about $3 million a month, or $35 million if the changes hold in place through the end of the year, a scenario that city officials said was far from likely. The Wall Street Journal first reported the decline in funding to the city’s Housing Authority.

Freddi Goldstein, a spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, said that the city had not seen changes in other federal funding formulas and that no other agencies have adjusted their budgets in anticipation of cuts.

But even as Mr. de Blasio was projecting steadfast resistance to any alteration in the city’s approach in the face of uncertainty in Washington, officials at the city’s Housing Authority were already quietly calibrating their budget to anticipate declines before receiving the February letters.

Karen Caldwell, the agency’s chief financial officer, said that she had braced for a decline in funding from the federal government as she prepared her agency’s $3.2 billion budget for the coming year — just not down to the levels seen in the letters.

She said anticipated getting about 87 cents on the dollar in federal reimbursement for the expense of running its apartments, down from about 90 cents last year; instead, she said, the federal Housing Department’s new calculation gave the agency about 85 cents on the dollar.

The new formula from the federal Housing Department does not apply to the whole year — new adjustments may come in subsequent months — but, Mr. Caldwell said, she was forced to begin planning for the entire year based on the changes.

“I can’t manage this place on a month-to-month basis,” she said in a telephone interview. “The more troubling issue is waiting for the second shoe to fall,” she added. “This is just a precursor.”
---
New York Art Scene Anxiously Waits for Decision on N.E.A.’s Fate

New York City sees itself as the cultural capital of the nation — if not the world — but its artistic community is suddenly vulnerable to budget cuts in Washington, where the administration of President Trump is considering eliminating the National Endowment for the Arts, which provides millions of dollars each year to groups in the city.

The endowment gave $14.5 million to 419 organizations in New York City in the fiscal year 2016, according to a study by the city comptroller’s office. That was more than 10 percent of all N.E.A. grants that year, making New York City groups the top recipients of such grants in the country.

“The only real consistent funding that sustains our company is the government-funding sources,” said Emily Joy Weiner, artistic director of Houses on the Moon Theater Company, which is based in Manhattan.

The group received a $10,000 grant from the N.E.A. for the play “The Assignment,” which focuses on gun violence and will debut next month. The grant was about 8 percent of the cost of putting on the production, she said.

The group also received funding from the New York State Council on the Arts, which in turn gets a large annual grant from the federal endowment. “Without those sources our company would never have been able to continue to grow and sustain itself,” Ms. Weiner said.

The New York Times reported last month that the federal government’s budget office had created a hit list of programs that could be eliminated to trim spending, including the arts endowment, which was established in 1965. Some of the first recipients of endowment grants were New York City-based dance groups, including the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Martha Graham Dance Company and the American Ballet Theater, according to Robert L. Lynch, the president of Americans for the Arts, an advocacy group that is pushing to preserve the endowment.

The N.E.A. is among several federal programs, including the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and AmeriCorps, that have long been targets of conservatives in Congress for trimming domestic spending.

Supporters of the endowment point out that its total annual budget of about $148 million is a tiny fraction of a federal budget of about $4 trillion a year, and that eliminating it would have no real impact on balancing the budget. At the same time, cutting grants would have a larger effect on the hundreds of groups that receive funding.

“New York is the cultural capital of the world and the notion that we’re going to zero out the National Endowment for the Arts is patently outrageous,” said Scott M. Stringer, the New York City comptroller, in an interview.

He said that endowment grants are particularly important for small organizations because they act as a kind of seal of approval that can give them the recognition and prestige that helps in attracting support from other donors. Many grants go to arts groups outside of central Manhattan, meaning they have been able to support cultural activities around the city, including in many poorer communities.

“Especially for a guy who comes form New York, I mean, come on, he knows full well that art and culture matter to major cities,” Mr. Stringer said of Mr. Trump.

John Czwartacki, the communications director for the Office of Management and Budget, said in a written statement that the Trump administration’s initial budget proposal will be released this month and that it was premature to discuss what it contained.

“The president and his cabinet are working collaboratively as we speak to create a budget that keeps the president’s promises to secure the country and prioritize taxpayer funds,” the statement said.

Jessamyn Sarmiento, director of strategic communications and public affairs at the N.E.A., said that it has not yet received word from the budget office about its proposed funding for the next fiscal year.

Russell Greenberg, a percussionist in a four-member avant-garde musical group based in Queens called Yarn/Wire, said it received a $10,000 N.E.A. grant this year to help pay for travel as it tours around the country. The group, with two pianists and two percussionists, plays pieces written for it by American composers.

Losing N.E.A. funding “wouldn’t mark the end of the organization but it would be quite a hit,” Mr. Greenberg said. “We depend on every penny to make things work for us. A world without the N.E.A., not just the money aspect of it, but the idea of the government supporting culture, I think would impact us psychologically, too.”
---
Follow the Health Care Money

Many Americans over the age of 60 would have to pay more for health insurance under the Republican health care plan. Many low-income families would lose their insurance. Many disabled people, hepatitis patients and opioid addicts, among others, would no longer receive treatments that they do now.

Care to guess where the billions of dollars in savings from these cuts would go instead?

They would go largely to the richest 1 percent of households, those earning at least $700,000 a year, according to the Tax Policy Center. A disproportionate amount of the savings would go to the richest of the rich — those earning in the millions.

The Republican health care bill is, in no small measure, a tax cut for the wealthy.

If you’re wondering how Republican leaders can defend cutting benefits for older, sicker and poorer Americans to pay for a top-end tax cut, House Speaker Paul Ryan offered a revealing non-answer, as Jonathan Chait noted in New York Magazine.

At a news conference, a reporter asked Ryan why the bill cuts taxes for the rich. Ryan laughed, waved the question away, told the reporter to read the bill and then moved on to another question. Evidently, he can’t defend the tax cut.

In related news, the list of groups opposing the bill now includes AARP, the American Medical Association, the American Hospital Association, the Association of American Medical Colleges, the Catholic Health Association of the United States and the Children’s Hospital Association.